\input texinfo   @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
@c %**start of header
@setfilename The_Steelbore_Standard.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@settitle The Steelbore Standard 1.33
@c %**end of header

@set VERSION 1.33
@set UPDATED 2026-07-24
@set SUBDOMAIN https://Standard.SpacecraftSoftware.org/

@copying
This manual is The Steelbore Standard (version @value{VERSION}, updated @value{UPDATED}).

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Mohamed Hammad & Spacecraft Software.

@quotation
This document is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International License (CC-BY-SA-4.0).  To view a copy of this licence,
visit @url{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/}.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Spacecraft Software
@direntry
* The Steelbore Standard: (The_Steelbore_Standard). Engineering specification for Spacecraft Software.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title The Steelbore Standard
@subtitle Engineering specification for Steelbore OS and the Spacecraft Software ecosystem
@subtitle For version @value{VERSION} (@value{UPDATED})
@author Mohamed Hammad
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

Maintained by Mohamed Hammad
@email{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}.
@*
@uref{@value{SUBDOMAIN}}
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top The Steelbore Standard

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Preamble::                    §1 — Preamble and changelog.
* Naming Convention::           §2 — Aerospace, Sci-Fi & AI naming.
* Priority Hierarchy::          §3 — Non-negotiable priority order.
* Licensing::                   §4 — Licensing & compliance.
* Project Posture::             §5 — Posture, required files, packaging.
* Platform Requirements::       §6 — Build, release & signed commits.
* Shell Environment::           §7 — First-class shell environments.
* Documentation::               §8 — Texinfo documentation standard.
* PFA Policy::                  §9 — Privacy-friendly application policy.
* Key Bindings::                §10 — CUA + Vim key binding requirements.
* Color Palette::               §11 — WCAG-compliant color palette.
* Typography::                  §12 — FOSS-licensed font requirements.
* UI/UX Design System::         §13 — Material Design & visual design system.
* Date Time Units::             §14 — ISO 8601, UTC Z, metric units.
* Attribution::                 §15 — Maintainer, project pages, credits.
* Development Progress Tracking:: §17 — Development progress tracking and reporting.
* Accessibility::               §18 — Accessible mode for CLI, TUI & GUI.
* Compliance Checklist::        §16 — Audit gate checklist.
* Skill Cross-References::      Skill cross-reference table.
* Concept Index::               Alphabetical concept index.
@end menu

@node Preamble
@chapter §1 — Preamble
The Steelbore Standard defines the engineering principles, compliance
requirements, and design conventions that govern all software produced
under Spacecraft Software. The umbrella encompasses two categories of
work: @strong{Steelbore OS} --- the operating system and all OS-specific
artifacts (configurations, themes, OS tooling) --- and
@strong{independent Spacecraft Software projects} such as Zamak,
Ironway, Ferrocast, and Caliper, which are designed to work with
Steelbore OS but are not OS-specific and may run on any compliant
platform. Both categories are full citizens of Spacecraft Software and
subject to this standard in full. Where a project-specific specification
conflicts with this standard, the stricter of the two requirements shall
prevail.

@strong{Standard name vs. project naming.} "The Steelbore Standard" is
the canonical, stable name of @emph{this standard}. It is independent of
the projects it governs and of the umbrella organization name --- the
standard retains this name regardless of any future renames. The v1.7
umbrella rename (Steelbore → Spacecraft Software) and the v1.8
reinstatement of this standard's name are recorded in the changelog.
Versioning of project codenames (see §2) and versioning of the standard
are separate concerns.

@menu
* Changelog::
@end menu

@node Changelog
@section Changelog
@itemize
@item
@strong{v1.33 (2026-07-24):} @strong{§18 added} --- Accessibility codified
as a first-class, auditable chapter covering CLI, TUI, and GUI. Accessible
mode is an @emph{opt-in layer}: mandatory for developers to implement, off
by default for users, activated by @code{--accessible} /
@code{SPACECRAFT_A11Y} / config. @strong{§18.5} carves out @strong{games},
which are exempt from §18 and §10 in full --- accessibility in a game is
optional, nothing is enforced, and its absence is never a compliance
failure; §18.5 offers a recommended list and shared vocabulary a game may
decline. Games are identified by declaration plus the §18.5 registry,
mirroring the §5.3 general-use carve-out. The @code{Steelbore} theme is unchanged and
remains the sole default; two additive sibling variants
(@code{steelbore-high-contrast}, @code{steelbore-mono}) join the §11.1
registry. @strong{§10} extended with keybinding remappability and reserved
assistive-technology chords. @strong{§11} clarified: palette contrast is
verified against Void Navy only --- text on a palette-colored fill requires
its own pair verification. @strong{§13} accessibility target raised from
@strong{WCAG 2.1 AA to WCAG 2.2 Level AA}, with @strong{EN 301 549 clause 11
(non-web software)} adopted as the normative anchor for CLI/TUI.
Compliance Checklist updated.
@item
@strong{v1.32 (2026-07-15):} @strong{§17 added} --- Development Progress
Tracking & Reporting codified, specifying milestones, MVP, and total PRD completion
tracking using a 20-character Unicode progress bar. Compliance Checklist
updated.
@item
@strong{v1.31 (2026-06-24):} @strong{§3.2} compiler optimization flag
documentation rule extended --- previously only @emph{disabled} flags
required documentation; now @strong{both applied and disabled} flags must
be explicitly noted (comment in build file or build-time message).
Symmetrical notation makes the full flag state visible at compile time
and makes build errors traceable to specific flags.
Compliance-checklist §3.2 bullet updated.
@item
@strong{v1.30 (2026-06-24):} @strong{§3.2} reframed --- modern hardware
universally provides multi-core/multi-thread capability; harnessing that
concurrency is the primary performance lever. Concurrency is an
@strong{architecture-level concern}, considered from the ground up
throughout design (not bolted on at implementation).
Adoption/abandonment conditions explicit: embrace concurrency where it
advances performance; abandon it where it degrades performance (overhead,
contention, serial workloads) or compromises Priority 1 (Stability).
Compliance-checklist bullet revised.
@item
@strong{v1.29 (2026-06-23):} Switch source of truth from GFM Markdown to
Texinfo: @file{The_Steelbore_Standard.texi} is now the canonical source;
@file{The_Steelbore_Standard.md} and @file{The_Steelbore_Standard.html} are
generated outputs.  @file{.docx}/@file{.odt} produced on request only.
@code{source-format} updated from @code{odt} to @code{texi}.  A
@file{Makefile} with @code{info}, @code{html}, @code{md}, and @code{pdf}
targets drives all derivation.
@item
@strong{v1.28 (2026-06-23):} @strong{§2.1:} synced development statuses
with Spacecraft-Software/Projects @code{PROJECTS.md} --- @code{Aetheric}
(was Active) and @code{Ferrocast} (was Planning) corrected to
@strong{Deprecated}, matching their @code{Deprecated} status in the
tracker. Per @code{PROJECTS.md}'s closed status vocabulary,
@code{Deprecated} means "Superseded by another project; do not extend."
@item
@strong{v1.27 (2026-06-22):} @strong{§15.1:} registered the
@strong{Loran Pages} subdomain
(@code{Loran-Pages.SpacecraftSoftware.org}), paired in the same
change-set with its new row and GitHub-repo/subdomain reference links in
Spacecraft-Software/Projects @code{PROJECTS.md}. The @code{loran-pages}
repo --- the community catalog of curated Loran help pages
(tldr-pages-style: flat @code{pages/<category>/<tool>.md}, a
@code{loran validate} CI gate, and a deterministic minisign-signed
@code{publish.yml} producer feeding @code{loran update}) --- was created
private with §5.2 posture files and §4.3 REUSE compliance (pages
CC-BY-SA-4.0, tooling GPL-3.0-or-later, @code{reuse lint}-clean).
@item
@strong{v1.26 (2026-06-21):} @strong{§15.1:} registered the
@strong{Vacuum} subdomain (@code{Vacuum.SpacecraftSoftware.org}), paired
in the same change-set with its new row and GitHub-repo/subdomain
reference links in Spacecraft-Software/Projects @code{PROJECTS.md}. The
@code{Vacuum} repo --- a Rust multi-crate disk-space recovery TUI/CLI
(parallel scan + a cleaner catalog: build artifacts, package-manager GC,
app caches, large files; dry-run-first, trash-by-default) --- was
created private with §5.2 posture files, an §8 Texinfo manual, the §5.5
packaging trio, and §4.3 REUSE compliance (@code{reuse lint}-clean).
@item
@strong{v1.25 (2026-06-20):} Rename §3.3 Priority 3 from "Hardened
Security" to "Security by Design" --- aligns the priority name with the
Security By Design principle (security built in from the start).
@item
@strong{v1.24 (2026-06-19):} Add §8 Documentation (Texinfo) --- Texinfo
as first-class technical manual format for user-facing Spacecraft
Software projects, following GNU conventions
(@code{@@dircategory}/@code{@@direntry} for Info directory registration,
@code{makeinfo}/@code{texi2pdf} build targets, CC-BY-SA-4.0 default with
GFDL-1.3-or-later as a permitted alternative, packaging integration for
Guix/Nix/PKGBUILD); renumber old §8--§15 → §9--§16 accordingly.
@item
@strong{v1.23 (2026-06-19):} @strong{§14.1:} registered the
@strong{Docs} subdomain (@code{Docs.SpacecraftSoftware.org}), paired in
the same change-set with its updated row and new GitHub-repo link in
Spacecraft-Software/Projects @code{PROJECTS.md}. The @code{Docs} repo
--- a centralized aggregation of the umbrella's planning corpus (PRDs,
plans, TODOs, research) organized by project then document type --- was
created private with §5.2 posture files and §4.3 REUSE compliance
(CC-BY-SA-4.0 documents, @code{reuse lint}-clean).
@item
@strong{v1.22 (2026-06-18):} @strong{§7 Shell Environment added} ---
codifies Nushell, Ion, Brush, and Bash as four equally first-class shell
environments; §7.1 Script Portability Policy mandates POSIX-compatible
scripts by default with Nushell/Ion native variants where needed and
prohibits Bashisms in shared scripts. Current §7--§14 renumbered §8--§15
accordingly. Compliance checklist updated with §7 bullet. Skill
Cross-References updated with shell-work row. @strong{§14.2:} added
email obfuscation note --- @code{[at]} form permitted in plain-text
prose; PKGBUILD @code{# Maintainer:} and SPDX headers must retain the
full address.
@item
@strong{v1.21 (2026-06-17):} @strong{§13.1:} registered subdomains for
three projects present in @code{PROJECTS.md} but missing from the table
--- @strong{Lode} (@code{Lode.SpacecraftSoftware.org}), @strong{Sonde}
(@code{Sonde.SpacecraftSoftware.org}), and @strong{Vault}
(@code{Vault.SpacecraftSoftware.org}). @strong{§3.1 and Skill
Cross-References:} corrected skill reference from @code{rust-guidelines}
to @code{microsoft-rust-guidelines} to match the actual skill ID in the
upstream @code{spacecraft-standard-constitution} skill.
@item
@strong{v1.20 (2026-06-17):} @strong{§5.5 added:} Package Distribution
Requirements --- every released package must ship
@code{packaging/guix.scm} (GNU Guix Scheme definition),
@code{packaging/default.nix} (Nix flake/derivation), and
@code{packaging/PKGBUILD} (Arch Linux @code{makepkg}), all present and
buildable before any release tag is pushed; each file must pin the exact
release version and SHA-256 checksum in the format native to its package
manager, and carry the project's SPDX two-tag header per §4.3.
@strong{§15} updated with a corresponding @code{§5.5}
compliance-checklist bullet.
@item
@strong{v1.19 (2026-06-16):} @strong{§13.1:} registered the @strong{MCP
Servers} project subdomain (@code{MCP-Servers.SpacecraftSoftware.org}),
paired in the same change-set with its row and GitHub-repo link in
Spacecraft-Software/Projects @code{PROJECTS.md}. The @code{mcp-servers}
repo --- MCP (Model Context Protocol) server configuration templates
across 12 coding agents/editors --- was onboarded to the umbrella with
the §5.2 posture files (@code{NOTICE.md}, @code{CONTRIBUTING.md}, README
posture section) and §4.3 REUSE compliance (@code{LICENSES/},
@code{REUSE.toml}, @code{reuse lint}-clean).
@item
@strong{v1.18 (2026-06-08):} Licensing classification follow-through.
(1) @strong{§4.1.1 added:} license-by-artifact-class table ---
@strong{software} (incl. skills) is
@code{GPL-3.0-or-later}/@code{AGPL-3.0-or-later}; @strong{documents}
(specs, guides, document deliverables, the published Standard) default
to @code{CC-BY-SA-4.0} (@code{CC-BY-4.0} for max-reuse cases);
@strong{third-party-derived} artifacts preserve their upstream license
per §4.2. (2) @strong{Skill-license correction:} clarified that skills
are software-class --- the published Standard document is
@code{CC-BY-SA-4.0} but the @code{spacecraft-standard-constitution} skill encoding is
@code{GPL-3.0-or-later} (the v1.17 skill metadata is corrected back to
GPL accordingly). (3) @strong{§4.1 migration policy (replaces v1.17's
"no forced re-license"):} existing projects are to be reviewed and
relicensed to the best-suited GPL/AGPL, per project, on signed commits.
The Standard and Construct repos are now REUSE-compliant
(@code{reuse lint}-clean) with @code{LICENSES/} directories and
@code{REUSE.toml}. (4) @strong{§2:} added @emph{Equilibrium} and
@emph{Dune} to the endorsed sci-fi naming sources.
@item
@strong{v1.17 (2026-06-08):} Licensing & build overhaul. (1)
@strong{Standard relicensed} from @code{GPL-3.0-or-later} to
@strong{@code{CC-BY-SA-4.0}}, effective this version forward --- GPL
suits software, not a prose specification; CC BY-SA preserves the
share-alike copyleft ethos and is purpose-built for documents. This
affects the Standard document itself only; the projects it governs are
unchanged by this point. (2) @strong{§4.1:} project license is now
@code{GPL-3.0-or-later} @strong{or} @code{AGPL-3.0-or-later} (AGPL for
network-facing software), prospective with no forced re-license. (3)
@strong{§4.2 added:} explicit upstream-license-compliance clause ---
preserve third-party copyright notices, license texts, and
@code{NOTICE}/@code{AUTHORS} verbatim; ship upstream licenses in
@code{LICENSES/}. (4) @strong{§4.3:} SPDX/REUSE compliance per
@url{https://reuse.software} --- two-tag headers
(@code{SPDX-FileCopyrightText} + @code{SPDX-License-Identifier}), a
@code{LICENSES/} directory, @code{.license}/@code{REUSE.toml} coverage
for headerless files (replacing the old "documents are exempt" rule),
and @code{reuse lint} as the CI gate. (5) @strong{§3.2:} explicit
optimization-flag exception --- flags like LTO that break/destabilize a
build on a given toolchain/platform (e.g., NixOS, cross-compilation)
MUST be disabled and documented, since Stability (P1) outranks
Performance (P2). §5.1/§5.2/§6/§13.2 license references and the §4/§12
compliance-checklist items updated to match.
@item
@strong{v1.16 (2026-06-08):} §12 reframed --- UTC Z is now explicitly
the @strong{default and preferred} timezone (not a universal mandate
forced onto every domain). New §12.2.1 documents a domain exception: a
project whose core domain is fundamentally local-time-bound (e.g.,
@code{Mawaqit} prayer-time calculations, sunrise/sunset, local
scheduling) may declare local time as its @emph{primary} representation
for that domain's data, provided it is documented, the UTC default still
governs the project's general-purpose machinery (logs, commits, APIs),
and a UTC instant remains derivable via a stored IANA timezone. §12.1
timezone row and §12.3 updated to reference the new exception and avoid
contradicting it.
@item
@strong{v1.15 (2026-06-08):} §2 naming convention expanded --- added
explicitly endorsed canonical sources: @emph{The Hitchhiker's Guide to
the Galaxy}, @emph{Hackers} (1995), Spielberg films, @emph{Ghost in the
Shell}, @emph{Æon Flux}, @emph{Super 8}, @emph{LOST}, the
@emph{Cloverfield} franchise, and robot/android names from any sci-fi
film or franchise. §2 now explicitly frames naming as a fun, playful
exercise alongside the existing space-machine-AI fitness test.
@item
@strong{v1.14 (2026-06-03):} §3.2 reframed --- Performance is the
foremost priority after Stability, and its default means of achievement
is @strong{multi-core, multi-thread concurrency} (parallelism as the
baseline, designed in from the start), @emph{unless} concurrency would
materially degrade performance (overhead, contention, or inherently
serial workloads), in which case a documented serial/simpler approach is
chosen. §3.2 compliance-checklist bullet revised.
@item
@strong{v1.13 (2026-06-03):} §3.1 reframed --- Priority 1 is now
@strong{Stability}, not Memory Safety. Memory safety remains the single
most important contributor and primary lever, but Priority 1 now also
mandates robust error handling, fault tolerance / graceful degradation,
and test-verified stability. Cardinal Rule updated to reference
stability (including memory safety); §3.1 compliance-checklist bullet
revised.
@item
@strong{v1.12 (2026-05-25):} §6.3 extended: added explicit authorized
signing identity rule --- all commits from v1.12 onwards must be signed
with the @code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org} Ed25519 SSH key;
committer email and signing key identity must both resolve to that
address. Commits predating this version are exempt.
@item
@strong{v1.11 (2026-05-24):} Three normative updates: (1) Copyright
notices updated to
@code{Copyright (C) 2026 Mohamed Hammad & Spacecraft Software} in all
locations. (2) §9.1 added: new apps must expose palette colors through a
named @code{Steelbore} theme rather than hard-coded hex literals,
enabling clean theme substitution. (3) §12 revised: UTC Z remains the
canonical/mandatory primary format; local time expressed as a UTC offset
may now optionally accompany UTC Z values in display, API responses, and
stored records.
@item
@strong{v1.10 (2026-05-20):} Standardized copyright notice to
@code{Copyright (C) 2026 Mohamed Hammad} in all three locations (YAML
frontmatter masthead, §13 attribution block, and @code{--version} /
About template in §6).
@item
@strong{v1.9 (2026-05-18):} Clarified organizational model in §1:
"Steelbore" now specifically refers to Steelbore OS and OS-specific
artifacts (configurations, themes, tooling); "Spacecraft Software" is
the broader umbrella. Independent projects (Zamak, Ironway, Ferrocast,
Caliper, etc.) are peer citizens of the umbrella --- designed to work
with Steelbore OS but OS-agnostic and usable on any compliant platform.
Both categories governed by this standard in full.
@item
@strong{v1.8 (2026-05-18):} Standard name reinstated as "The Steelbore
Standard". Primary mandate reaffirmed as the Steelbore OS line; scope
explicitly extended by default to all Spacecraft Software projects
(unless a project's own spec explicitly carves out an exception).
Subtitle updated to reflect dual scope. Source file renamed
@code{The_Spacecraft_Software_Standard.md} →
@code{The_Steelbore_Standard.md}. §13.1: added Standard subdomain entry
(@code{Standard.SpacecraftSoftware.org}). Umbrella org name and domain
(Spacecraft Software / SpacecraftSoftware.org) unchanged.
@item
@strong{v1.7 (2026-05-15):} Umbrella renamed from @code{Steelbore} to
@code{Spacecraft Software} per the brand consolidation. Standard's name
updated to "The Spacecraft Software Standard"; domain to
@code{SpacecraftSoftware.org}; contact email to
@code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}; §13.1 subdomain pattern
to @code{<ProjectName>.SpacecraftSoftware.org}. Skill ID prefix renamed
(@code{steelbore-*} → @code{spacecraft-*}). Subproject codenames
unchanged. The OS line (@code{Steelbore OS},
@code{Steelbore OS Bravais}, @code{Steelbore OS Lattice}) retains the
Steelbore name and is unaffected by this rename.
@item
@strong{v1.6 (2026-05-13):} Synced §2.1 development statuses with
PROJECTS.md --- @code{Bravais} and @code{Anvil} and @code{Flux} promoted
to Completed; @code{Ferrocast} corrected to Planning; @code{Mawaqit}
updated to Planning (Pending rename).
@item
@strong{v1.5 (2026-05-13):} Corrected @code{Craton} status in §2.1 from
@code{Active} to @code{Reserved} --- codename is registered but no
development has started yet.
@item
@strong{v1.4 (2026-05-13):} Synced §2.1 Legacy Metallurgical Registry
with PROJECTS.md --- added five previously unregistered pre-v1.2
codenames: @code{Anvil}, @code{Flux}, @code{Pearlite},
@code{Ferrite_OS}, and @code{Forge}. Expanded §13.1 subdomain table to
include all first-party projects with GitHub repositories that were
missing: Anvil, Construct, Ferrite_OS, Forge, Ginx, Loran, Pearlite.
@item
@strong{v1.3 (2026-05-12):} Added §6.3 (Signed & Verified Commits ---
mandatory Ed25519 SSH commit signing with hosting-platform "Verified"
status; the rule extends to programmatic, CI, and assistant-driven
commits and requires rewrites to preserve signatures). Added §13.3
(Third-Party Attribution --- @code{CREDITS.md} at project/skill root
when external work is substantially built upon, distinct from mechanical
SPDX license metadata). Two new compliance-checklist bullets cover both
additions.
@item
@strong{v1.2 (2026-05-11):} Replaced §2 metallurgical naming convention
with Aerospace, Sci-Fi & AI naming (aerospace/astronomy terminology +
franchise references from @emph{2001: A Space Odyssey}, @emph{The
Matrix}, @emph{Terminator}). Preserved pre-v1.2 metallurgical-era names
under §2's Legacy Registry. Added explicit statement that the standard's
name was decoupled from project naming and would survive any project or
umbrella rename (subsequently revisited in v1.7's umbrella rename).
Renamed @code{Lattice} to @code{Bravais} (collision with Lattice OS) in
registry and §13.1 subdomain table. Flagged @code{Mawaqit} as pending
rename under the v1.2 convention.
@item
@strong{v1.1 (2026-05-06):} Added §5 Project Posture (personal-hobby
default, general-use carve-out, required posture files). Renumbered
prior §5--§13 to §6--§14. Added posture bullet to compliance checklist.
@item
@strong{v1.0 (2026-03-08):} Initial release.
@end itemize

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Naming Convention
@chapter §2 — Aerospace, Sci-Fi & AI Naming Convention
All @strong{new} project codenames, module identifiers, and
public-facing component names @strong{must} draw from one of the
following domains:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Real aerospace and astronomy} --- orbital mechanics terms,
propulsion concepts, named missions/programs, stellar objects and
phenomena, observatories.

@item
@strong{Science-fiction franchises with space / AI / cybernetic themes}
--- naming is meant to be enjoyable as well as fitting. The following
are explicitly endorsed canonical sources:

@itemize
@item
@emph{2001: A Space Odyssey}, @emph{The Matrix}, @emph{Terminator} ---
the original canonical trio
@item
@emph{The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy} --- also a rich vein for
in-jokes (Vogon, Marvin, 42, Babel fish, Heart of Gold)
@item
@emph{Hackers} (1995)
@item
Spielberg films (@emph{Close Encounters of the Third Kind}, @emph{E.T.
the Extra-Terrestrial}, @emph{A.I. Artificial Intelligence},
@emph{Minority Report}, @emph{Ready Player One}, etc.)
@item
@emph{Ghost in the Shell}
@item
@emph{Equilibrium}
@item
@emph{Dune}
@item
@emph{Æon Flux}
@item
@emph{Super 8}
@item
@emph{LOST} (TV series)
@item
@emph{Cloverfield} films
@item
Robot / android names from any sci-fi film or franchise (e.g., HAL,
Data, Bishop, T-800, GERTY, TARS, Marvin)
@end itemize

Other franchises (e.g., @emph{Alien}, @emph{Blade Runner}, @emph{Ex
Machina}) remain acceptable if they fit the space-machine-AI register.

@item
@strong{Generic sci-fi / AI vocabulary} --- hyperspace, neural,
cybernetic, synthetic, sentinel, oracle, daemon, vector, lattice (the
lowercase common noun), etc.

@end itemize

@multitable {Utilities} {Apollo, Discovery, Skynet, Trinity} {Missions / Ships / AI Machines}
@headitem
Category
 @tab Examples
 @tab Domain
@item
Projects
 @tab Apollo, Discovery, Skynet, Trinity
 @tab Missions / Ships / AI Machines
@item
Modules
 @tab Apogee, HAL, Cortex, Sentinel
 @tab Subsystems / AI Cores
@item
Utilities
 @tab Boost, Throttle, Trace, Telemetry
 @tab Operational Verbs / Telemetry
@item
Releases
 @tab Vega, Pulsar, Quasar, Nebula
 @tab Stellar Phenomena
@end multitable

Names must be @strong{fitting for space-related and futuristic AI
machines} --- the test is whether the name would feel at home on the
hull of a spacecraft or in the boot banner of an AI machine. Reject
proposed names that don't pass this test.

@menu
* Legacy Registry::
* Skill IDs::
@end menu

@node Legacy Registry
@section §2.1 — Legacy Metallurgical Registry (pre-v1.2)
Projects named before the v1.2 convention drew from metallurgy,
materials science, and industrial forging. These names are
@strong{preserved as-is} unless explicitly renamed by the maintainer.
The v1.2 convention applies prospectively --- no forced back-rename.

@multitable {@code{Ferrite_OS}} {Renamed to Spacecraft Software (umbrella, v1.7)} {Former umbrella organization name. Renamed 2026-05-15 under the v1.7 brand consolidation. The OS line (@code{Steelbore OS}, @code{Steelbore OS Bravais}, @code{Steelbore OS Lattice}) retains the Steelbore name.}
@headitem
Codename
 @tab Status
 @tab Description
@item
@code{Steelbore}
 @tab Renamed to Spacecraft Software (umbrella, v1.7)
 @tab Former umbrella organization name. Renamed 2026-05-15 under the
v1.7 brand consolidation. The OS line (@code{Steelbore OS},
@code{Steelbore OS Bravais}, @code{Steelbore OS Lattice}) retains the
Steelbore name.
@item
@code{Aetheric}
 @tab Deprecated
 @tab Next-generation extensible text editor (Pulsar + Quasar + Nebula
IPC).
@item
@code{Zamak}
 @tab Active
 @tab Rust bootloader (Limine rewrite)
@item
@code{Bravais}
 @tab Completed (renamed)
 @tab NixOS flake configuration. Renamed from @code{Lattice} due to
collision with Lattice OS. @code{Bravais} is still a metallurgical-era
name (Bravais lattice) and predates the v1.2 convention.
@item
@code{Ferrocast}
 @tab Deprecated
 @tab Rust PowerShell rewrite (16-crate workspace)
@item
@code{Craton}
 @tab Reserved
 @tab Rust universal package manager --- codename registered; no work
started yet.
@item
@code{Ironway}
 @tab Active
 @tab Rust OpenTTD rewrite
@item
@code{Caliper}
 @tab Active
 @tab Rust raster-to-vector tracing engine (CLI+TUI)
@item
@code{Mawaqit}
 @tab Planning (@strong{Pending rename})
 @tab Islamic prayer times app (Flutter + Rust CLI + libmawaqit). To be
renamed under the v1.2 aerospace/sci-fi/AI convention.
@item
@code{Anvil}
 @tab Completed
 @tab Rust workspace; benches and CHANGELOG; legacy forging-tool name.
@item
@code{Flux}
 @tab Completed
 @tab Rust workspace; CHANGELOG and deny.toml; legacy metallurgical-flux
name.
@item
@code{Pearlite}
 @tab Active
 @tab Rust workspace; audit.toml, clippy.toml, CHANGELOG; steel
microstructure name.
@item
@code{Ferrite_OS}
 @tab Active
 @tab Custom OS / DOS-emulation experiments; ferrite (iron-based
material) name.
@item
@code{Forge}
 @tab Active
 @tab Production flavor tooling (forge-cli, forge-build,
forge-activate); forging-tool name.
@end multitable

Existing legacy-named projects MAY be renamed under the v1.2 convention
at the maintainer's discretion --- renames are optional. When a rename
happens, update this table and §15.1's subdomain table in the same
commit.

@node Skill IDs
@section §2.2 — Skill IDs are functional, not codenamed
Skill directory names and @code{SKILL.md} @code{name} fields are
@strong{functional identifiers} (e.g., @code{spacecraft-standard-constitution},
@code{spacecraft-document-format}) and are not subject to the §2
codename convention. §2 reserves codenames for
projects/modules/utilities/releases, not for skill identifiers.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Priority Hierarchy
@chapter §3 — Priority Hierarchy (Non-Negotiable Order)
A higher-numbered priority @strong{may never compromise} a
lower-numbered one.

@menu
* Priority 1::
* Priority 2::
* Priority 3::
@end menu

@node Priority 1
@section §3.1 — Priority 1: Stability
Software must behave predictably and remain correct under sustained and
adverse conditions. Stability is the foremost priority. @strong{Memory
safety is the single most important contributor to stability and the
primary means of achieving it --- but it is not the whole of Priority
1.}

@strong{Memory safety (primary lever):}

@itemize
@item
@strong{Preferred language: Rust} --- governed by the Spacecraft
Software Rust Guidelines. Always load the
@code{microsoft-rust-guidelines} skill before writing any Rust code.
@item
When Rust is not viable (Flutter/Dart, Zig, etc.), @strong{mandatory
mitigations}:
@itemize
@item
@strong{ASLR} (Address Space Layout Randomization) on all compiled
binaries
@item
@strong{CFI} (Control-Flow Integrity) wherever the toolchain supports it
@end itemize

@item
Memory-Safe Languages (MSLs) are always preferred. If an MSL alternative
exists, it must be chosen unless a documented technical exemption is
filed.
@end itemize

@strong{Beyond memory safety, stability also requires:}

@itemize
@item
@strong{Robust error handling} --- failures must be surfaced and
handled, never silently swallowed; no panics / @code{unwrap} /
@code{expect} on untrusted or fallible input in production paths.
@item
@strong{Fault tolerance and graceful degradation} --- components must
survive partial failure, degrade gracefully under load or dependency
loss, and recover rather than crash.
@item
@strong{Verified by testing} --- stability properties must be backed by
tests (unit, integration, and fuzz/property where applicable) gating CI,
not asserted by inspection alone.
@end itemize

@node Priority 2
@section §3.2 — Priority 2: Performance
Performance is the foremost priority after stability. Modern hardware
universally provides @strong{multi-core, multi-thread} capability;
harnessing that concurrency is the primary means of achieving
performance. Concurrency is not an afterthought --- it must be
@strong{considered from the ground up}, throughout architecture design:
data ownership, thread boundaries, synchronization points, and
parallelism opportunities must be identified during design, not
discovered during optimization.

Concurrency is adopted where it genuinely advances performance. It is
@strong{abandoned} where it degrades performance (synchronization
overhead, lock contention, or inherently serial / small workloads) or
where it would compromise Priority 1 (Stability). When a serial or
simpler approach outperforms or is safer, it must be chosen and the
trade-off documented.

@itemize
@item
Release builds should use CPU-optimized flags --- @code{-march=native},
LTO, PGO --- @strong{where the toolchain and target support them
reliably.} @strong{Every applied flag must be explicitly noted} (e.g., a
comment in the build file or a build-time message); @strong{every
disabled flag and the reason for disabling must be equally noted.}
Visible flag state at compile time makes errors traceable to a specific
flag. Any flag known to break or destabilize a build on a given platform,
toolchain, or linker configuration (e.g., LTO under certain NixOS,
cross-compilation, or static-linking setups) MUST be disabled. Stability
(Priority 1) outranks Performance (Priority 2) --- never ship a broken
build for the sake of a flag.
@item
Benchmarking is @strong{mandatory} before and after any optimization
work; regressions must be documented and justified --- and it is the
evidence by which the concurrency-vs-serial trade-off above is decided.
@end itemize

@node Priority 3
@section §3.3 — Priority 3: Security by Design
@itemize
@item
Kernel hardening (XanMod, grsecurity profiles) where applicable.
@item
Sandboxing and privilege separation for all network-facing components.
@item
@strong{Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) readiness:} all crypto
subsystems must support PQC migration paths. Use hybrid schemes
(classical + PQC candidate) where library support exists. Adopt
NIST-finalized PQC standards within one major release cycle.
@itemize
@item
Current targets: @strong{ML-KEM-768}, @strong{ML-DSA-65} (as used in
Ferrocast)
@end itemize

@item
Dependency auditing: @code{cargo-audit} or equivalent before any
third-party crate inclusion.
@end itemize

@strong{Cardinal Rule:} Any optimization that weakens @strong{stability
(including memory safety)} or security hardening @strong{must be
rejected}, no exceptions.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Licensing
@chapter §4 — Licensing & Compliance

@menu
* Project License::
* Upstream License::
* REUSE Compliance::
@end menu

@node Project License
@section §4.1 — Project License (GPL-3.0-or-later or AGPL-3.0-or-later)
@itemize
@item
@strong{License:} strong copyleft --- each project chooses
@strong{@code{GPL-3.0-or-later}} or @strong{@code{AGPL-3.0-or-later}},
whichever fits the project better:
@itemize
@item
Use @strong{@code{AGPL-3.0-or-later}} when the software is
@strong{network-facing} --- anything users interact with primarily over
a network (servers, web services, SaaS, hosted APIs, multiplayer/network
daemons). AGPL closes the "SaaS loophole" by extending the
source-availability obligation to users served over a network.
@item
Use @strong{@code{GPL-3.0-or-later}} for everything else (local CLIs,
libraries, desktop/TUI apps, OS components, bootloaders).
@item
GPLv3 and AGPLv3 are mutually compatible by design, so an umbrella
mixing both is fine.
@end itemize

@item
No proprietary, closed-source, or permissive-only license for core
project code.
@item
@strong{Review & migrate (existing projects).} This dual choice is not
merely prospective: existing projects are to be @strong{reviewed and
relicensed} to whichever of @code{GPL-3.0-or-later} /
@code{AGPL-3.0-or-later} best fits them (AGPL for network-facing
software). Migration is the maintainer's per-project decision, landed on
that project's own signed commit; any project that deliberately retains
a non-best-fit license must document why.
@end itemize

@menu
* Artifact Classes::
@end menu

@node Artifact Classes
@subsection §4.1.1 — Artifact license classes
The GPL/AGPL choice above governs @strong{software}. License by artifact
class:

@multitable {@strong{Documents} --- specifications, prose guides, books, and document deliverables produced per the @code{spacecraft-document-format} skill, including the published Standard} {Preserve the @strong{upstream} license per §4.2 (e.g., @code{MIT}, @code{GFDL-1.3-or-later}) --- never relicensed to the project default}
@headitem
Artifact class
 @tab Default license
@item
@strong{Software} --- code, manifests, build tooling, and
@strong{skills}
 @tab @code{GPL-3.0-or-later} (or @code{AGPL-3.0-or-later} if
network-facing, §4.1)
@item
@strong{Documents} --- specifications, prose guides, books, and document
deliverables produced per the @code{spacecraft-document-format} skill,
including the published Standard
 @tab @code{CC-BY-SA-4.0} by default (@code{CC-BY-4.0} permitted when a
document is intended for maximal reuse)
@item
@strong{Third-party-derived artifacts}
 @tab Preserve the @strong{upstream} license per §4.2 (e.g., @code{MIT},
@code{GFDL-1.3-or-later}) --- never relicensed to the project default
@end multitable

Skills are @strong{software-class} → @code{GPL-3.0-or-later} (no skill
is network-facing, so AGPL does not apply). Note the deliberate split
for the Standard itself: the @strong{published Standard document} is
@code{CC-BY-SA-4.0} (it is a document), while its
@code{spacecraft-standard-constitution} @strong{skill} encoding is
@code{GPL-3.0-or-later} (it is a skill).

@node Upstream License
@section §4.2 — Upstream License Compliance (preserve what you build on)
When a project incorporates, adapts, or links third-party code, it MUST
satisfy that upstream's license in full --- independent of the project's
own GPL/AGPL choice:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Preserve verbatim} all upstream copyright notices, license
texts, @code{NOTICE}/@code{AUTHORS} files, and in-file license headers
--- never strip, rewrite, or relicense them.
@item
@strong{Ship} each distinct upstream license text in the project's
@code{LICENSES/} directory (§4.3).
@item
@strong{Verify compatibility} of the upstream license with the project's
GPL/AGPL license before inclusion.
@item
This is the legal/mechanical obligation; §15.3's @code{CREDITS.md} is
the human-readable narrative counterpart. When both are triggered, both
apply.
@end itemize

@node REUSE Compliance
@section §4.3 — SPDX & REUSE Compliance
Spacecraft Software follows the
@strong{@uref{https://reuse.software,REUSE specification}} for
unambiguous, machine-readable license and copyright metadata. Every
project MUST be @code{reuse lint}-clean.

@strong{Every file carries two SPDX tags} --- copyright @emph{and}
license:

@verbatim
// SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>
// SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
@end verbatim

(Substitute the project's actual license --- @code{GPL-3.0-or-later} or
@code{AGPL-3.0-or-later} --- and the correct comment syntax for the file
type.)

@itemize
@item
@strong{Software source files} (@code{.rs}, @code{.ts}, @code{.js},
@code{.py}, @code{.sh}, @code{.ps1}, @code{.go}, etc.) and project
manifests (@code{Cargo.toml}, @code{package.json}, @code{flake.nix},
etc.) carry both tags as an inline header.
@item
@strong{Files that cannot carry an inline header} --- documents
(@code{.odt}, @code{.ods}, @code{.odp}, @code{.docx}, @code{.xlsx},
@code{.pptx}, @code{.pdf}, @dots{}), images, binary assets, generated
files --- are covered by a @code{.license} sidecar file @strong{or} an
entry in the repo-root @code{REUSE.toml}. No file is left uncovered
(this replaces the former blanket "documents are exempt" rule).
@item
@strong{@code{LICENSES/} directory:} the verbatim text of every license
used in the repo lives in @code{LICENSES/<SPDX-id>.txt} (e.g.,
@code{LICENSES/GPL-3.0-or-later.txt},
@code{LICENSES/AGPL-3.0-or-later.txt}, plus any upstream licenses per
§4.2). A root @code{LICENSE} file MAY remain as a pointer for GitHub's
license detection.
@item
@strong{CI gate:} @code{reuse lint} MUST pass before shipping.
@end itemize

When writing or reviewing any file, confirm REUSE coverage; when
generating a new file, add the two-tag header (or the @code{.license}
sidecar / @code{REUSE.toml} entry for files that can't carry one).

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Project Posture
@chapter §5 — Project Posture
Spacecraft Software is a personal hobby project. This posture is the
@strong{default} for every project under the umbrella and is
non-negotiable. Individual projects may adopt a more open posture (see
§5.3) but never a more closed one.

§4 defines the formal license; this section defines the @strong{stated
stance} that sits alongside it. License says what the user @emph{may}
do; posture says what they should @emph{expect} from the maintainer.

@menu
* Default Posture::
* Required Posture Files::
* General-Use Carve-Out::
* Maintainer Discretion::
* Package Distribution::
@end menu

@node Default Posture
@section §5.1 — Default Posture (Personal / Hobby)
@multitable {Contributions} {GPL-3.0-or-later or AGPL-3.0-or-later, per §4.1 (formal terms govern in any conflict)}
@headitem
Aspect
 @tab Default
@item
Audience
 @tab Maintainer's own use case
@item
Pace
 @tab Hobby pace; no service-level commitments
@item
Warranty
 @tab None --- provided AS IS
@item
Liability
 @tab None --- see project @code{NOTICE.md}
@item
Contributions
 @tab Welcome but not guaranteed to be accepted
@item
Forking
 @tab Encouraged
@item
License
 @tab GPL-3.0-or-later or AGPL-3.0-or-later, per §4.1 (formal terms
govern in any conflict)
@end multitable

@node Required Posture Files
@section §5.2 — Required Posture Files (per project)
Every Spacecraft Software project repository @strong{must} ship the
following files at its root, derived from the canonical Spacecraft
Software templates:

@multitable {@code{CONTRIBUTING.md}} {REUSE license directory (§4.3): verbatim text of every license used (@code{GPL-3.0-or-later} or @code{AGPL-3.0-or-later}, plus any upstream licenses per §4.2). A root @code{LICENSE} MAY remain as a GitHub-detection pointer.}
@headitem
File
 @tab Purpose
@item
@code{README.md}
 @tab Includes a "Project Posture" section linking to the two below
@item
@code{NOTICE.md}
 @tab Full no-warranty / no-liability statement; defers to the project's
GPL/AGPL license (§4.1) for binding terms
@item
@code{CONTRIBUTING.md}
 @tab Contribution scope, PR-acceptance discretion, sign-off, security
reporting, license-of-contributions
@item
@code{LICENSES/}
 @tab REUSE license directory (§4.3): verbatim text of every license
used (@code{GPL-3.0-or-later} or @code{AGPL-3.0-or-later}, plus any
upstream licenses per §4.2). A root @code{LICENSE} MAY remain as a
GitHub-detection pointer.
@end multitable

Customize only the project name, scope, and any project-specific
carve-outs.

@node General-Use Carve-Out
@section §5.3 — General-Use Carve-Out
A project may declare itself @strong{intended for general use}. When it
does:

@itemize
@item
The declaration MUST appear in that project's @code{README.md} posture
section.
@item
The no-warranty / no-liability stance from §5.1 still applies in full
--- general-use status changes audience and intent, @strong{not} legal
terms.
@item
General-use projects must hold a higher release-quality bar: semantic
versioning, maintained @code{CHANGELOG.md}, deprecation policy, and a
documented support window for the current major version.
@end itemize

@strong{General-use registry} (keep in sync with §15.1 subdomain table):

@multitable {(all others)} {General-use}
@headitem
Project
 @tab Posture
@item
Anvil-SSH
 @tab General-use
@item
(all others)
 @tab Personal
@end multitable

@node Maintainer Discretion
@section §5.4 — Maintainer Discretion
PR acceptance, feature scope, naming, architecture, and roadmap are at
the maintainer's sole discretion. This is stated openly so contributors
can calibrate effort accordingly. Rejection reflects fit, not quality.

@node Package Distribution
@section §5.5 — Package Distribution Requirements
Every released package @strong{must} ship first-party package
definitions for the following package managers, committed alongside the
release:

@multitable {@code{packaging/default.nix}} {Arch Linux --- @code{makepkg}-compatible}
@headitem
File
 @tab Package manager / format
@item
@code{packaging/guix.scm}
 @tab GNU Guix --- Scheme package definition
@item
@code{packaging/default.nix}
 @tab Nix --- Nix flake / derivation
@item
@code{packaging/PKGBUILD}
 @tab Arch Linux --- @code{makepkg}-compatible
@end multitable

@strong{Rules:}

@itemize
@item
All three files MUST be present and buildable before a release tag is
pushed.
@item
Each file must reference the exact release version and source archive
SHA-256 checksum so that the package can be built reproducibly from the
tagged release. Use the format native to each package manager:
@itemize
@item
@strong{Guix (@code{guix.scm}):}
@code{(sha256 (base32 "<nix-base32-hash>"))} inside the @code{origin}
stanza.
@item
@strong{Nix (@code{default.nix}):} @code{sha256 = "<sri-or-hex-hash>";}
inside the @code{fetchurl} or @code{fetchFromGitHub} call.
@item
@strong{Arch (@code{PKGBUILD}):} @code{sha256sums=('<hex-hash>')} array
variable alongside @code{source=()}.
@end itemize

@item
The @code{packaging/} directory is tracked in the project's
version-control repository alongside the source code.
@item
These files are software-class artifacts and inherit the project's
GPL/AGPL license (§4.1); each file must carry the standard SPDX two-tag
header (§4.3).
@item
If a package manager's ecosystem imposes a stricter naming scheme or
directory layout, comply with that scheme while still meeting the above
requirements.
@end itemize

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Platform Requirements
@chapter §6 — Platform & Systems Requirements

@menu
* POSIX Compliance::
* Post-Quantum Cryptography::
* Signed Commits::
@end menu

@node POSIX Compliance
@section §6.1 — POSIX Compliance
All CLI tools, daemons, and system utilities must be
@strong{POSIX-compliant}. Platform-specific extensions go behind feature
flags and must not be required for core functionality.

@node Post-Quantum Cryptography
@section §6.2 — Post-Quantum Cryptography
Crypto subsystems must have migration paths to post-quantum algorithms.
Current implementations should use hybrid schemes where library support
exists.

@node Signed Commits
@section §6.3 — Signed & Verified Commits (Non-Negotiable)
Every commit pushed to a Spacecraft Software-controlled Git remote
@strong{must} be cryptographically signed and show "Verified" on the
hosting platform's commit/PR view (GitHub today; Gitway or any future
Spacecraft Software host inherits the same rule).

@strong{Mandatory rules --- violation blocks shipping:}

@multitable {Hosting-platform "Verified" required} {All commits from v1.12 onwards must be signed with the @code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org} key. The committer email and the signing key identity must both resolve to @code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}. Commits predating v1.12 are exempt from this requirement.}
@headitem
Rule
 @tab Detail
@item
All commits signed
 @tab @code{commit.gpgsign=true} configured globally. SSH signing
(@code{gpg.format=ssh}) is the current default; GPG is acceptable. The
signing key MUST be registered as a @strong{Signing} key on the hosting
platform --- Authentication-only keys do not validate signatures.
@item
Authorized signing identity
 @tab All commits from v1.12 onwards must be signed with the
@code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org} key. The committer email
and the signing key identity must both resolve to
@code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}. Commits predating v1.12
are exempt from this requirement.
@item
Hosting-platform "Verified" required
 @tab Every commit on a Spacecraft Software remote must show "Verified"
on the platform's commit/PR view. Unsigned or "Unverified" commits MUST
be remediated (re-signed via rebase or amend by the original author)
before merge to a default branch.
@item
Programmatic commits signed too
 @tab Bots, CI pipelines, scripted commits, and assistant-driven commits
inherit the same rule --- no @code{--no-gpg-sign}, no signing-disabled
subshells. The signing pipeline runs unattended.
@item
Rewrites preserve signatures
 @tab Rebase, amend, cherry-pick, and squash MUST re-sign each resulting
commit. Don't push history that lost signatures through rewriting.
@item
Local verification is best-effort
 @tab @code{git log --show-signature} may report "No signature" on a
given host when @code{~/.ssh/allowed_signers} is not populated --- this
is a local-verifier gap, not a signing failure. The hosting platform's
"Verified" badge is authoritative.
@end multitable

@strong{Algorithm note:} Ed25519 SSH signing is the current default.
§6.2 calls for PQC readiness across the cryptographic surface;
commit-signing algorithm migration is gated on hosting-platform support
for post-quantum key formats. When GitHub (or Spacecraft Software's own
Gitway) accepts PQC signing keys, Spacecraft Software commits migrate
accordingly.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Shell Environment
@chapter §7 — Shell Environment
Spacecraft Software tooling, documentation, and CI pipelines target
@strong{four first-class shell environments}: @strong{Nushell},
@strong{Ion}, @strong{Brush}, and @strong{Bash}. All four are equally
supported; none is deprecated or downgraded.

@menu
* Script Portability::
@end menu

@node Script Portability
@section §7.1 — Script Portability Policy
@multitable {Nushell / Ion native variants when needed} {Bash-only extensions (@code{[[ ]]}, @code{(( ))}, process substitution @code{<(...)}, @code{$@{var^^@}}, indexed arrays) are prohibited in files intended for all four shells. Bash-specific scripts are permitted only when explicitly scoped (e.g., @code{#!/usr/bin/env bash} shebang, clearly labeled).}
@headitem
Rule
 @tab Detail
@item
Default: POSIX-compatible
 @tab Shell scripts in source trees, CI pipelines, @code{Makefile}
targets, and documentation examples @strong{must} be written to the
POSIX sh subset unless a shell-native feature is required. POSIX scripts
run correctly in Bash and Brush without modification.
@item
Nushell / Ion native variants when needed
 @tab When a task cannot be expressed cleanly in POSIX sh (structured
data pipelines, typed parameters, Nushell modules), provide a Nushell
(@code{.nu}) and/or Ion-native variant alongside the POSIX version. Do
not force POSIX-only idioms that degrade the Nushell or Ion experience.
@item
No Bashisms in shared scripts
 @tab Bash-only extensions (@code{[[ ]]}, @code{(( ))}, process
substitution @code{<(...)}, @code{$@{var^^@}}, indexed arrays) are
prohibited in files intended for all four shells. Bash-specific scripts
are permitted only when explicitly scoped (e.g.,
@code{#!/usr/bin/env bash} shebang, clearly labeled).
@item
Graceful shell detection
 @tab Tools that need runtime shell detection must inform the user or
degrade gracefully rather than silently failing in non-Bash
environments.
@end multitable

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Documentation
@chapter §8 — Documentation (Texinfo)
Spacecraft Software user-facing projects should ship a @strong{Texinfo
manual} as the canonical technical reference. Texinfo is the preferred
format for reference documentation that accompanies distributed
software, following GNU project conventions.

@menu
* When Manual Required::
* Source Format::
* Required Elements::
* Output Formats::
* Manual Licensing::
* Packaging Integration::
@end menu

@node When Manual Required
@section §8.1 — When a Texinfo Manual Is Required
@multitable {CLI / TUI / GUI application with substantive user-facing functionality} {@strong{MUST} ship a Texinfo manual covering invocation, options, concepts, and examples}
@headitem
Project type
 @tab Requirement
@item
CLI / TUI / GUI application with substantive user-facing functionality
 @tab @strong{MUST} ship a Texinfo manual covering invocation, options,
concepts, and examples
@item
Library with a public API
 @tab @strong{SHOULD} ship a Texinfo reference manual covering all
public interfaces
@item
Simple script / internal tooling
 @tab @strong{MAY} skip; a well-structured @code{README.md} suffices
@end multitable

@node Source Format
@section §8.2 — Source Format and File Layout
@itemize
@item
Source files use the @code{.texi} extension (Texinfo 7.x+).
@item
Manuals live at @code{doc/<project>.texi} in the project root.
@item
The project's top-level @code{Makefile} must expose three targets:
@code{make info}, @code{make html}, @code{make pdf}.
@end itemize

@node Required Elements
@section §8.3 — Required Structural Elements
Every Texinfo manual must include the following elements:

@multitable {@code{@@dircategory} / @code{@@direntry}} {Registers the manual in the Info directory}
@headitem
Element
 @tab Purpose
@item
@code{@@dircategory} / @code{@@direntry}
 @tab Registers the manual in the Info directory
@item
@code{@@copying} block
 @tab License statement and copyright notice
@item
@code{@@titlepage}
 @tab Title, version, author, and copyright
@item
@code{@@node Top} + @code{@@top}
 @tab Required top-level node for Info readers
@item
@code{@@menu} per chapter
 @tab Navigation structure
@end multitable

@node Output Formats
@section §8.4 — Output Formats
Build and ship all three output formats:

@multitable {@code{.html}} {@code{makeinfo} / @code{texi2any}} {Info readers (Emacs, standalone @code{info})}
@headitem
Format
 @tab Tool
 @tab Purpose
@item
@code{.info}
 @tab @code{makeinfo} / @code{texi2any}
 @tab Info readers (Emacs, standalone @code{info})
@item
@code{.html}
 @tab @code{makeinfo --html}
 @tab Project documentation website
@item
@code{.pdf}
 @tab @code{texi2pdf}
 @tab Printable reference
@end multitable

Install @code{.info} files using @code{install-info} at package install
time so they appear in the system Info directory.

@node Manual Licensing
@section §8.5 — Licensing
Texinfo manuals are @strong{document-class} artifacts (§4.1.1) and
default to @strong{CC-BY-SA-4.0}. @strong{GFDL-1.3-or-later} is a
permitted alternative when the manual is distributed alongside
GPL-licensed software and compatibility with GNU documentation
collections is desired. Include the chosen license in @code{LICENSES/}
per §4.3.

@node Packaging Integration
@section §8.6 — Packaging Integration
Package manifests must install the @code{.info} file and register it
with @code{install-info}:

@multitable {@strong{PKGBUILD} (@code{packaging/PKGBUILD})} {Add @code{texinfo} to @code{makedepends}; @code{install -Dm644} for @code{.info} files; call @code{install-info} in @code{post_install}}
@headitem
Package manager
 @tab Requirements
@item
@strong{Guix} (@code{packaging/guix.scm})
 @tab Add @code{texinfo} as a native input; run @code{install-info} in
the install phase
@item
@strong{Nix} (@code{packaging/default.nix})
 @tab Add @code{texinfo} to @code{nativeBuildInputs}; standard
Autoconf/Make @code{installPhase} handles @code{install-info}
automatically
@item
@strong{PKGBUILD} (@code{packaging/PKGBUILD})
 @tab Add @code{texinfo} to @code{makedepends}; @code{install -Dm644}
for @code{.info} files; call @code{install-info} in @code{post_install}
@end multitable

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node PFA Policy
@chapter §9 — Privacy-Friendly Application (PFA) Policy
Every Spacecraft Software application must satisfy @strong{all three}
PFA requirements:

@multitable {Minimal Permissions} {User data stored locally by default; sync is strictly opt-in, E2E encrypted}
@headitem
Requirement
 @tab Rule
@item
No Tracking/No Ads
 @tab Zero advertising, tracking, analytics SDKs, or telemetry beacons
@item
Minimal Permissions
 @tab Only essential permissions; requested lazily at point of use,
never eagerly
@item
Local Storage
 @tab User data stored locally by default; sync is strictly opt-in, E2E
encrypted
@end multitable

When reviewing or designing any feature that touches data handling,
permissions, or networking, verify all three PFA requirements are met.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Key Bindings
@chapter §10 — Key Bindings
All interactive applications must support @strong{both}:

@strong{Scope.} This chapter does @strong{not} apply to projects registered
as @strong{games} under §18.5 --- games are exempt from §10 in full,
including the CUA and Vim rows below. Modal editing and text-editor chords
are a poor fit for real-time play; a game's control scheme is entirely at
the maintainer's discretion. §18.5 restates the useful parts as
recommendations a game may decline.

@multitable {@strong{Vim}} {Modal editing layer (Normal / Insert / Visual mode) as opt-in feature. Minimum: hjkl navigation where full Vim layer is impractical}
@headitem
Scheme
 @tab Requirement
@item
@strong{CUA}
 @tab Standard bindings (Ctrl+C/X/V/Z/S) must work in all text input
contexts
@item
@strong{Vim}
 @tab Modal editing layer (Normal / Insert / Visual mode) as opt-in
feature. Minimum: hjkl navigation where full Vim layer is impractical
@end multitable

@strong{Remappability (mandatory).} Every binding must be user-remappable
through the project's configuration layer --- a fixed, non-configurable
keymap is non-compliant. Users of alternative input devices, non-QWERTY
layouts, and assistive technology cannot be assumed to reach any particular
chord.

@strong{Reserved assistive-technology chords.} The following modifiers are
claimed by screen readers and @strong{must not} be captured by a Spacecraft
Software application; capturing them takes keys away from the users who
depend on them most:

@multitable {@kbd{Insert} / @kbd{KP_Insert}} {Orca (GNOME/Linux) --- the screen reader's own modifier}
@headitem
Chord
 @tab Claimed by
@item
@kbd{Insert} / @kbd{CapsLock}
 @tab NVDA (Windows) --- the NVDA modifier key
@item
@kbd{Insert} / @kbd{KP_Insert}
 @tab Orca (GNOME/Linux) --- the screen reader's own modifier
@item
@kbd{Ctrl}+@kbd{Option}
 @tab VoiceOver (macOS) --- the "VO" modifier
@end multitable

Every action reachable by pointer must also be reachable by keyboard; focus
order must be linear and the focused element must be visibly indicated. See
§18 for the wider accessibility requirements this supports.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Color Palette
@chapter §11 — Spacecraft Software Color Palette (WCAG-Compliant)
The @strong{only} permitted colors for Spacecraft Software interfaces
and documents:

@multitable {Liquid Coolant} {@code{#8BE9FD}} {RGB(139, 233, 253)} {Primary Text / Active Readout}
@headitem
Token
 @tab Hex
 @tab RGB
 @tab Role
@item
Void Navy
 @tab @code{#000027}
 @tab RGB(0, 0, 39)
 @tab @strong{Background / Canvas}
@item
Molten Amber
 @tab @code{#D98E32}
 @tab RGB(217, 142, 50)
 @tab Primary Text / Active Readout
@item
Steel Blue
 @tab @code{#4B7EB0}
 @tab RGB(75, 126, 176)
 @tab Primary Accent / Structural
@item
Radium Green
 @tab @code{#50FA7B}
 @tab RGB(80, 250, 123)
 @tab Success / Safe Status
@item
Red Oxide
 @tab @code{#FF5C5C}
 @tab RGB(255, 92, 92)
 @tab Warning / Error Status
@item
Liquid Coolant
 @tab @code{#8BE9FD}
 @tab RGB(139, 233, 253)
 @tab Info / Links
@end multitable

@strong{@code{#000027} (Void Navy) is the mandatory background for ALL
Spacecraft Software surfaces.} No alternative background is permitted.
This is non-negotiable.

@strong{Scope of the contrast guarantee.} Every foreground token above is
verified against the Void Navy background and passes WCAG Level AA
(Molten Amber 7.64:1, Steel Blue 4.77:1, Radium Green 14.87:1, Red Oxide
6.74:1, Liquid Coolant 14.74:1). That guarantee covers
@strong{foreground-on-background pairings only}. Palette tokens paired with
@emph{each other} are mostly far below the 3:1 floor --- Molten Amber on
Red Oxide is 1.13:1 and Radium Green on Liquid Coolant is 1.01:1, which is
indistinguishable. Therefore:

@itemize
@item
Rendering palette-colored @strong{text on a palette-colored fill} (a chip,
badge, filled button, or selected row) is @strong{forbidden} unless that
specific pair has been measured at ≥4.5:1 for text, or ≥3:1 for
non-text UI boundaries.
@item
Color may never be the @strong{sole} carrier of meaning. Every colored
status must also carry a text tag or symbol --- see §18.2.
@end itemize

For document/file generation → load the
@code{spacecraft-document-format} skill. For IDE/terminal themes → load
the @code{spacecraft-theme-factory} skill.

@menu
* Steelbore Theme::
@end menu

@node Steelbore Theme
@section §11.1 — Steelbore Theme (Application Theming Standard)
When building a new Spacecraft Software application (GUI, TUI, or web),
all palette references @strong{must} be accessed through a named theme
called @strong{@code{Steelbore}} rather than referenced as bare hex
literals. The @code{Steelbore} theme is the canonical color contract:

@multitable {@code{foreground}} {Maps to palette token} {@code{#8BE9FD}}
@headitem
Theme token
 @tab Maps to palette token
 @tab Hex
@item
@code{background}
 @tab Void Navy
 @tab @code{#000027}
@item
@code{foreground}
 @tab Molten Amber
 @tab @code{#D98E32}
@item
@code{accent}
 @tab Steel Blue
 @tab @code{#4B7EB0}
@item
@code{success}
 @tab Radium Green
 @tab @code{#50FA7B}
@item
@code{error}
 @tab Red Oxide
 @tab @code{#FF5C5C}
@item
@code{info}
 @tab Liquid Coolant
 @tab @code{#8BE9FD}
@end multitable

@strong{Rationale:} isolating palette references behind the
@code{Steelbore} theme name makes it trivial for end users to substitute
a custom theme without touching application logic --- swap the theme,
not every hex literal.

@itemize
@item
The theme file/module @strong{must} be named @code{steelbore}
(snake_case) in the project's theme registry, configuration layer, or
equivalent (e.g., @code{themes/steelbore.json}, @code{steelbore.toml}, a
Rust @code{Theme::Steelbore} variant).
@item
Hard-coding palette hex values directly in UI logic is
@strong{forbidden} for new apps. Use theme tokens exclusively.
@item
Existing apps are encouraged but not required to migrate; new apps are
required.
@end itemize

@subsection §11.1.1 — Accessibility Variants (additive siblings)

@code{steelbore} is and remains the @strong{sole default theme}. The
variants below are @strong{additive siblings} inside the same theme
registry, selected only by explicit user action or by the §18.1 accessible-mode
toggle. They never alter, replace, or take precedence over @code{steelbore},
and the §11 canonical palette table above is unchanged by their existence.

@multitable {@code{steelbore-high-contrast}} {§18.1 accessible mode, or explicit selection} {Every role token lifted to ≥7:1 (WCAG AAA) on Void Navy}
@headitem
Variant
 @tab Selected by
 @tab Behavior
@item
@code{steelbore}
 @tab @strong{Default} --- always, unless overridden
 @tab Canonical §11 palette, unchanged
@item
@code{steelbore-high-contrast}
 @tab §18.1 accessible mode, or explicit selection
 @tab Every role token lifted to ≥7:1 (WCAG AAA) on Void Navy
@item
@code{steelbore-mono}
 @tab Explicit selection, or @code{NO_COLOR}
 @tab 4-bit ANSI only --- defers entirely to the user's terminal palette
@end multitable

@code{steelbore-high-contrast} lifts @strong{only the two tokens that need
it}. Tokens already at or above 7:1 are carried over untouched, keeping the
variant as close to the brand as accessibility permits:

@multitable {@code{foreground}} {Molten Amber} {@code{#7FAEDC}} {@code{#D98E32}} {14.87:1}
@headitem
Theme token
 @tab Base token
 @tab Variant hex
 @tab Contrast
@item
@code{background}
 @tab Void Navy
 @tab @code{#000027}
 @tab (canvas)
@item
@code{foreground}
 @tab Molten Amber
 @tab @code{#D98E32}
 @tab 7.64:1
@item
@code{accent}
 @tab Steel Blue
 @tab @code{#7FAEDC}
 @tab 8.73:1
@item
@code{success}
 @tab Radium Green
 @tab @code{#50FA7B}
 @tab 14.87:1
@item
@code{error}
 @tab Red Oxide
 @tab @code{#FF8080}
 @tab 8.41:1
@item
@code{info}
 @tab Liquid Coolant
 @tab @code{#8BE9FD}
 @tab 14.74:1
@end multitable

Only @code{accent} (Steel Blue @code{#4B7EB0} → @code{#7FAEDC}) and
@code{error} (Red Oxide @code{#FF5C5C} → @code{#FF8080}) shift; the other
four are the §11 values verbatim. @strong{Void Navy remains the background
in every variant} --- high contrast is achieved by lifting foregrounds, never
by abandoning the canvas. These two hexes are accessibility-derived lifts of
existing role tokens, not new brand colors, and may not be used outside the
variant.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Typography
@chapter §12 — Typography (FOSS-Licensed Fonts Only)
Acceptable font licenses: @strong{OFL, Apache 2.0, Ubuntu Font License,
CC0-1.0}

@multitable {Body / Code} {monospace (system)} {License}
@headitem
Context
 @tab Font
 @tab License
@item
Headings
 @tab Share Tech Mono
 @tab OFL
@item
Body / Code
 @tab Inconsolata
 @tab OFL
@item
Fallback
 @tab monospace (system)
 @tab N/A
@end multitable

Never use proprietary fonts. When suggesting or using fonts in any
Spacecraft Software artifact, verify they are available on Google Fonts
or another FOSS-licensed repository.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node UI/UX Design System
@chapter §13 — UI/UX Design System
@itemize
@item
@strong{Material Design} is the required component system for all
graphical applications. Theme Material components with the §11 color
palette.
@item
@strong{WCAG 2.2 Level AA} contrast is the minimum for all color
pairings. Any new color additions must be WCAG-verified before adoption,
and the verification must state @emph{which pairing} was measured (§11).
@item
@strong{Accessibility} is governed by @strong{§18}, which applies to CLI,
TUI, and GUI alike. §13 is the graphical design system; §18 is the
accessibility contract. Where the two overlap, §18 governs.
@end itemize

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Date Time Units
@chapter §14 — Date, Time & Units

@menu
* Date Format Rules::
* UTC Z Policy::
* Local Time Companion::
* Duration Format::
* Rust Time Guidance::
@end menu

@node Date Format Rules
@section §14.1 — Date & Time Format Rules
@multitable {Time format} {@strong{UTC Z is the default and preferred primary} for general-purpose, cross-system, and machine-readable timestamps. A project whose core domain is inherently local-time-bound (e.g., solar/prayer-time calculations) may declare local time as its primary record instead --- a documented exception, not a free choice. See §14.2 and §14.2.1} {@code{PT1H30M} not "1h 30m"}
@headitem
Concern
 @tab Rule
 @tab Example
@item
Date format
 @tab ISO 8601 only: @code{YYYY-MM-DD}
 @tab @code{2026-03-08}
@item
Time format
 @tab 24-hour only: @code{HH:MM:SS} --- AM/PM is @strong{never}
permitted
 @tab @code{14:30:00}
@item
Timestamp
 @tab Combined ISO 8601 UTC: @code{YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SSZ}
 @tab @code{2026-03-08T14:30:00Z}
@item
Timezone
 @tab @strong{UTC Z is the default and preferred primary} for
general-purpose, cross-system, and machine-readable timestamps. A
project whose core domain is inherently local-time-bound (e.g.,
solar/prayer-time calculations) may declare local time as its primary
record instead --- a documented exception, not a free choice. See §14.2
and §14.2.1
 @tab @code{Z} not @code{+00:00}
@item
Duration
 @tab ISO 8601 duration format only
 @tab @code{PT1H30M} not "1h 30m"
@item
Units
 @tab Metric (SI) primary; imperial in parentheses only if locale
requires
 @tab @code{100 km (62 mi)}
@end multitable

Apply these conventions to all generated code, documentation, comments,
and any user-facing strings. Never output AM/PM time, non-ISO dates, or
imperial-primary units.

@node UTC Z Policy
@section §14.2 — UTC Z Timezone Policy
@strong{UTC Z is the default and preferred timezone for stored,
transmitted, logged, and committed timestamps across Spacecraft Software
projects.} It is the convention every project should reach for first ---
it keeps cross-project tooling, sorting, and interchange simple and
unambiguous. Under this default, the @code{Z} suffix is required on
primary timestamps, and local time expressed as a UTC offset (e.g.,
@code{2026-05-24T13:34:55+03:00}) may optionally accompany a UTC Z value
as a secondary, human-convenience field --- but UTC Z remains the
authoritative record.

This is a strong default, not a universal mandate forced onto every
domain regardless of fit --- §14.2.1 documents the exception that lets a
project whose domain is genuinely local-time-bound use local time as its
primary record instead.

@strong{Rules for projects under the UTC Z default --- apply unless a
project has filed the §14.2.1 exception:}

@multitable {File metadata written by Spacecraft Software tools} {Offset notation (@code{+03:00}, @code{-05:00}, etc.) is @strong{forbidden as a replacement} for UTC Z. It is permitted only as an optional companion field alongside a @code{Z}-suffixed primary.}
@headitem
Rule
 @tab Detail
@item
@code{Z} suffix required
 @tab Every @strong{primary} stored/transmitted timestamp MUST end with
@code{Z}. @code{2026-03-08T14:30:00Z} ✓. A companion local-time field
with UTC offset is permitted alongside it.
@item
No offset notation as replacement
 @tab Offset notation (@code{+03:00}, @code{-05:00}, etc.) is
@strong{forbidden as a replacement} for UTC Z. It is permitted only as
an optional companion field alongside a @code{Z}-suffixed primary.
@item
No bare local time in data
 @tab Local-time timestamps @strong{without} timezone info are
@strong{forbidden} in files, databases, logs, API responses, and
commits.
@item
Log entries use UTC + @code{Z}
 @tab Every log line timestamp must be @code{YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.sssZ}
(millisecond precision encouraged).
@item
Commit timestamps use UTC
 @tab @code{GIT_COMMITTER_DATE} and @code{GIT_AUTHOR_DATE} must be UTC
when set programmatically.
@item
File metadata written by Spacecraft Software tools
 @tab mtime/ctime written by Spacecraft Software tools must be
UTC-sourced.
@end multitable

@menu
* Domain Exception::
@end menu

@node Domain Exception
@subsection §14.2.1 — Domain Exception: Inherently Local-Time-Bound Projects
A project whose core domain is fundamentally defined by @strong{local
civil or solar time} --- not by a moment in absolute (UTC) time --- may
declare local time as the @strong{primary} representation for that
domain's data. Examples: prayer-time calculations (@code{Mawaqit}),
sunrise/sunset tables, local event or business-hours scheduling. For
data like this, the meaningful value @emph{is} "06:14 local, at this
place" --- collapsing it to a UTC instant first and treating that as
authoritative would misrepresent what the data actually is.

@strong{Conditions for the exception:}

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Document it.} The project's README or spec must state explicitly
which data uses local time as primary, and the @emph{domain} reason why
--- not developer or user convenience.
@item
@strong{Keep the default everywhere else.} General-purpose machinery
within the same project --- logs, commit timestamps, internal
cross-system APIs, telemetry --- still follows the §14.2 UTC Z default.
The exception covers the domain data itself, not the whole project.
@item
@strong{Preserve UTC derivability.} Store or compute the IANA timezone
(e.g., @code{Africa/Cairo}) alongside the local value, so a UTC instant
remains derivable for interchange, comparison, and storage portability.
@item
@strong{This is an exception, not an escape hatch.} "Local time is more
convenient" or "our users are mostly in one timezone" do not qualify ---
the domain itself must be inherently local-time-bound.
@end enumerate

@node Local Time Companion
@section §14.3 — Local Time as Optional Companion
@strong{For projects under the UTC Z default} (§14.2), local time
expressed as a UTC offset is permitted as an @strong{optional companion}
to the UTC Z primary value --- in human-facing display, in API responses
(as an additional field, never replacing the UTC Z field), and in stored
records where timezone context aids human readers. The UTC Z value is
always present and always authoritative; the local-time companion is
supplemental only. (A project operating under the §14.2.1 domain
exception inverts these roles for its domain data --- local time is
primary there, with UTC kept derivable rather than displayed as
authoritative.)

@itemize
@item
The @code{--absolute-time} flag (defined in
@code{spacecraft-cli-standard} §3) disables relative-time rendering but
always renders as UTC, not local time.
@item
If a future CLI wants to show local time in human mode, it MUST:
@enumerate
@item
Accept a @code{--tz <IANA-zone>} flag (e.g., @code{--tz Africa/Cairo}).
@item
Render local time only to stdout in human mode --- never in
@code{--json} output.
@item
Always include the UTC value alongside the local rendering.
@item
Never persist or transmit the local-time rendering.
@end enumerate

@item
JSON/machine output (@code{--format json/jsonl/yaml/csv}) MUST always
use UTC + @code{Z}.
@end itemize

@node Duration Format
@section §14.4 — Duration Format
Durations follow ISO 8601 duration notation:

@multitable {@code{PTnHnMnS}} {@code{PT1H30M}} {1 hour 30 minutes}
@headitem
Format
 @tab Example
 @tab Meaning
@item
@code{PTnHnMnS}
 @tab @code{PT1H30M}
 @tab 1 hour 30 minutes
@item
@code{PnD}
 @tab @code{P7D}
 @tab 7 days
@item
@code{PnYnM}
 @tab @code{P1Y6M}
 @tab 1 year 6 months
@end multitable

Prose forms like "1h 30m", "90 minutes", "1.5 hours" are
@strong{forbidden} in machine-readable output. They are acceptable in
@code{--help} text only.

@node Rust Time Guidance
@section §14.5 — Rust Implementation Guidance
When writing Rust code that handles time:

@multitable {No @code{NaiveDateTime} in output} {@code{chrono::Local} and @code{jiff::Zoned} (with non-UTC zone) are @strong{forbidden} in serialized output}
@headitem
Concern
 @tab Rule
@item
Crate choice
 @tab Use @code{jiff} (preferred) or @code{chrono} --- never @code{time}
0.1.x
@item
UTC type
 @tab @code{jiff::Timestamp} or @code{chrono::DateTime<chrono::Utc>} for
all stored values
@item
Local type
 @tab @code{chrono::Local} and @code{jiff::Zoned} (with non-UTC zone)
are @strong{forbidden} in serialized output
@item
Serialization
 @tab Always serialize as @code{"2026-03-08T14:30:00Z"} (string, ISO
8601, @code{Z} suffix)
@item
@code{serde}
 @tab Use @code{#[serde(with = "...")]} or a newtype that enforces UTC
on deserialization
@item
@code{SystemTime}
 @tab Acceptable for internal durations; convert to UTC ISO 8601 string
before any output
@item
No @code{NaiveDateTime} in output
 @tab @code{chrono::NaiveDateTime} has no timezone --- forbidden in any
serialized or logged value
@end multitable

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Attribution
@chapter §15 — Attribution, Maintainer & Contact
@strong{Maintainer:} Mohamed Hammad
@strong{Contact:} @email{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}
@strong{Copyright:} Copyright (C) 2026 Mohamed Hammad & Spacecraft
Software | @strong{License:} CC-BY-SA-4.0
@strong{Website:} @url{https://SpacecraftSoftware.org/}

@menu
* Project Pages::
* Required Attribution::
* Third-Party Attribution::
@end menu

@node Project Pages
@section §15.1 — Project Pages
Each Spacecraft Software project has a dedicated subdomain following the
pattern @code{https://<ProjectName>.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}. Use the
project-specific URL in all project-level outputs; use
@code{https://SpacecraftSoftware.org/} only for umbrella references.

@multitable {Spacecraft Software (main)} {@url{https://Loran-Pages.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}}
@headitem
Project
 @tab URL
@item
Spacecraft Software (main)
 @tab @url{https://SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
The Steelbore Standard
 @tab @url{https://Standard.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Aetheric
 @tab @url{https://Aetheric.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Gitway
 @tab @url{https://Gitway.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Ferrocast
 @tab @url{https://Ferrocast.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Caliper
 @tab @url{https://Caliper.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Craton
 @tab @url{https://Craton.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Ironway
 @tab @url{https://Ironway.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Zamak
 @tab @url{https://Zamak.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Bravais
 @tab @url{https://Bravais.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Mawaqit
 @tab @url{https://Mawaqit.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Flux
 @tab @url{https://Flux.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Anvil
 @tab @url{https://Anvil.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Construct
 @tab @url{https://Construct.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Ferrite_OS
 @tab @url{https://Ferrite.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Forge
 @tab @url{https://Forge.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Ginx
 @tab @url{https://Ginx.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Loran
 @tab @url{https://Loran.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Pearlite
 @tab @url{https://Pearlite.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
MCP Servers
 @tab @url{https://MCP-Servers.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Lode
 @tab @url{https://Lode.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Sonde
 @tab @url{https://Sonde.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Vacuum
 @tab @url{https://Vacuum.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Vault
 @tab @url{https://Vault.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Docs
 @tab @url{https://Docs.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@item
Loran Pages
 @tab @url{https://Loran-Pages.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}
@end multitable

When a new project is created, add its subdomain to this table
immediately.

@node Required Attribution
@section §15.2 — Mandatory Attribution in Project Outputs
Every Spacecraft Software product @strong{must} surface the following
attribution in at least one of: @code{--help} output, @code{--version}
output, README, or About/Info screen.

@strong{Required attribution block:}

@verbatim
Maintained by Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>
Copyright (C) 2026 Mohamed Hammad & Spacecraft Software  |  License: GPL-3.0-or-later
https://<ProjectName>.SpacecraftSoftware.org/

(The License line shows the project's own license — GPL-3.0-or-later or AGPL-3.0-or-later per §4.1.)
@end verbatim

@strong{Per-surface rules:}

@multitable {About / Info (GUI/TUI)} {REUSE two-tag header (§4.3): @code{SPDX-FileCopyrightText} + @code{SPDX-License-Identifier} (@code{GPL-3.0-or-later} or @code{AGPL-3.0-or-later})}
@headitem
Surface
 @tab Required content
@item
@code{--version}
 @tab Maintainer name, project URL, copyright year
@item
@code{--help}
 @tab Project URL and maintainer name (at footer)
@item
README
 @tab "Maintainer" section: name,
@code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}, project URL
@item
About / Info (GUI/TUI)
 @tab Maintainer name, project URL, copyright year
@item
SPDX header
 @tab REUSE two-tag header (§4.3): @code{SPDX-FileCopyrightText} +
@code{SPDX-License-Identifier} (@code{GPL-3.0-or-later} or
@code{AGPL-3.0-or-later})
@end multitable

@strong{Specific rules:}

@itemize
@item
The contact email is always
@code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org} --- never a personal
domain, GitHub handle, or other address.

@item
The copyright year reflects the year of first release or current year,
or a range (e.g., @code{2025-2026}) when a project spans multiple years.

@item
Link text for project pages must use the full URL as the display text or
a clear label (e.g.,
@code{[Gitway](https://Gitway.SpacecraftSoftware.org/)}), never an
opaque label.

@item
For CLI @code{--version} output in human mode, the footer line format
is:

@verbatim
Maintained by Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>
https://<ProjectName>.SpacecraftSoftware.org/
@end verbatim

@item
For CLI @code{--version} output in JSON/machine mode, include in
@code{metadata}:

@verbatim
"maintainer": "Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>",
"website": "https://<ProjectName>.SpacecraftSoftware.org/"
@end verbatim

@item
@strong{Email obfuscation in plain-text prose.} In plain-text prose
contexts (README body, CONTRIBUTING.md, human-readable documentation)
where the address is not a clickable link,
@code{Mohamed.Hammad [at] SpacecraftSoftware.org} is permitted as a
scraper-resistant form. @code{# Maintainer:} lines in PKGBUILDs and
@code{SPDX-FileCopyrightText} headers @strong{must} always use the full
address --- those formats are parsed by @code{makepkg}/@code{pkgcheck}
and @code{reuse lint} respectively, and obfuscation breaks them.

@end itemize

@node Third-Party Attribution
@section §15.3 — Third-Party Attribution
Spacecraft Software artifacts must give credit where credit is due. When
a project or skill @strong{substantially builds on third-party work},
that credit appears in a @code{CREDITS.md} at the artifact's root ---
@code{<project-root>/CREDITS.md} for projects,
@code{<skill-name>/CREDITS.md} for skills.

@code{CREDITS.md} is the inbound counterpart to §15.2's outbound
attribution: §15.2 tells consumers who maintains Spacecraft Software;
§15.3 tells consumers whose work Spacecraft Software stands on.

@strong{Triggers} (any one obligates a @code{CREDITS.md}):

@itemize
@item
Content adapted, derived, or copied verbatim from an external source
under any license (permissive or copyleft).
@item
A library, framework, or specification whose ideas or implementation
form a substantial conceptual basis for the artifact, beyond routine
dependency use.
@item
Named prior art, research, or design work whose insights were borrowed.
@end itemize

@strong{Not triggered by} (license metadata alone suffices):

@itemize
@item
Routine package-manager dependencies whose @code{LICENSE} files are
surfaced mechanically via Cargo, npm, pip, Nix, etc.
@item
Well-known standards and specifications (POSIX, RFC, ISO, GFM, ODF,
OOXML) that the artifact conforms to but does not redistribute.
@item
Public-domain conventions and common idioms.
@end itemize

@strong{Required content per credited work:}

@multitable {Source URL} {Required} {@code{https://github.com/microsoft/rust-guidelines}}
@headitem
Field
 @tab Required
 @tab Example
@item
Name
 @tab Yes
 @tab @code{Microsoft Pragmatic Rust Guidelines}
@item
Author(s)
 @tab Yes
 @tab @code{Microsoft Corporation}
@item
License
 @tab Yes
 @tab @code{MIT License}
@item
Source URL
 @tab Yes
 @tab @code{https://github.com/microsoft/rust-guidelines}
@item
Scope
 @tab Yes
 @tab One-line description of what was adapted/used
@end multitable

A skill MAY keep a deeper, scope-limited attribution file inside its
@code{references/} directory (typically
@code{references/ATTRIBUTION.md}) when the credit applies specifically
to adapted reference content. The root @code{CREDITS.md} remains
canonical and should link down to any such deeper file.

SPDX headers (§4) cover license compliance mechanically;
@code{CREDITS.md} is the human-readable narrative --- who, what, and how
the upstream work shaped the Spacecraft Software artifact.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Development Progress Tracking
@chapter §17 — Development Progress Tracking & Reporting

When implementing features or writing code based on a Product Requirements Document (PRD) or project plan, coding assistants and developers must continuously track and report progress. This reporting ensures transparency, early detection of drift, and alignment on the implementation status of key milestones.

@section §17.1 — Progress Reporting Format

Every progress report must include the percentage of completion for individual milestones, the overall progress of the Minimum Viable Product (MVP), and the total progress of the PRD.

@strong{Format template:}
@example
[Progress: ▰▰▰▰▰▰▰▰▰▰▰▰▰▰▱▱▱▱▱▱] 70%
Milestones: M0: 100% | M1: 100% | M2: 70% | M3: 0% | M4: 0%
Product Status: MVP: 90% | PRD: 70%
@end example

@section §17.2 — Progress Bar Style

The progress bar must use high-visibility Unicode block characters (e.g., @code{▰} for filled and @code{▱} for empty) to form a clean, static, 20-character visual representation of total PRD completion. Do not use legacy ASCII characters like @code{#} or @code{-} for the progress bar.

@section §17.3 — Reporting Cadence

Progress must be reported:
@itemize
@item
At the start of a coding task (initial estimate/baseline)
@item
At the completion of each logical component or milestone task
@item
When summarizing the work done at the end of a turn/message
@end itemize

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Accessibility
@chapter §18 — Accessibility (Opt-In Mode Layer)

Spacecraft Software applications must be usable by people who navigate by
screen reader, by keyboard alone, or with low vision. This chapter is the
accessibility contract for @strong{all} application classes --- CLI, TUI, and
GUI --- and supersedes §13's design-system framing wherever the two overlap.

@strong{Two-sided rule.} Accessibility support is @strong{mandatory for the
developer to implement} and @strong{optional for the user to activate}:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Every} Spacecraft Software application @strong{other than a project
registered as a game (§18.5)} MUST ship a working accessible mode. This
applies to new and existing projects alike --- there is no
new-projects-only phase-in.
@item
Accessible mode is @strong{off by default}. The default experience is the
@code{Steelbore} theme and standard rendering, entirely unchanged. Enabling
accessibility never becomes a precondition for using the software normally,
and shipping it never degrades the default presentation.
@end itemize

@strong{Normative targets.} @strong{WCAG 2.2 Level AA} where the success
criteria apply, and @strong{EN 301 549 clause 11 (non-web software)} as the
anchor for CLI and TUI applications, which WCAG addresses only indirectly.
Clause 11 is cited because it is the only normative text that speaks to
terminal software; the European Accessibility Act has been enforceable since
2025-06-28.

@menu
* Accessible Mode Activation::
* CLI and TUI Accessibility::
* GUI Accessibility::
* Accessibility Verification::
* Games Carve-Out::
@end menu

@node Accessible Mode Activation
@section §18.1 — Activation

Accessible mode resolves once at startup from four sources. Precedence,
highest first:

@multitable {@strong{4. Auto-detect hints}} {@code{SPACECRAFT_A11Y=1} / @code{SPACECRAFT_A11Y=0} --- the umbrella-wide environment variable}
@headitem
Source
 @tab Form
@item
@strong{1. Command-line flag}
 @tab @code{--accessible} / @code{--no-accessible}
@item
@strong{2. Environment}
 @tab @code{SPACECRAFT_A11Y=1} / @code{SPACECRAFT_A11Y=0} --- the
umbrella-wide environment variable
@item
@strong{3. Configuration}
 @tab @code{[accessibility] enabled = true} in the project's config file
@item
@strong{4. Auto-detect hints}
 @tab @code{TERM=dumb}, @code{NO_COLOR}, or @code{GTK_MODULES} containing
@code{gail:atk}
@end multitable

@itemize
@item
A hint (source 4) @strong{may} enable accessible mode, but must never be
inferred from an ambiguous signal. An explicit @code{--no-accessible} or
@code{SPACECRAFT_A11Y=0} always wins, at every level.
@item
Unset at every source ⇒ @strong{standard @code{Steelbore} rendering,
unchanged}. Silence is never read as consent to change the default
presentation.
@item
The resolved state and the source that decided it must be reported under
@code{--verbose}, so a user can tell why the mode is on or off.
@item
The toggle is a @strong{single switch} governing every behavior in §18.2 and
§18.3 together. Per-feature accessibility flags fragment the contract and are
not a substitute.
@end itemize

@node CLI and TUI Accessibility
@section §18.2 — CLI & TUI Requirements

@strong{The constraint that shapes everything here:} a terminal has no
accessibility tree. There is no ARIA, there are no roles, and there are no
live regions. A screen reader reads the emulator's character grid, so a
redraw-based interface produces re-reads and speech loops rather than useful
speech. Accessibility cannot be delegated to the TUI framework --- no terminal
UI library provides it --- so the application must supply a linear fallback
itself.

@subsection §18.2.1 — Rules that apply in every mode

These are not gated behind the toggle. They are correctness requirements for
all output, always:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Color is never the sole carrier of meaning.} Every colored status
carries a text tag: @code{[OK]}, @code{[ERROR]}, @code{[WARN]},
@code{[INFO]}. A red line that says only "failed to connect" is
non-compliant; @code{[ERROR] failed to connect} is compliant.
@item
@strong{No text on colored fills} unless that specific pair is verified per
§11 --- palette tokens are verified against Void Navy, not against each
other.
@item
@strong{Diagnostics go to @code{stderr}}, results to @code{stdout}, and the
two are never interleaved into one visual block.
@item
@strong{@code{NO_COLOR}, @code{FORCE_COLOR}, @code{CLICOLOR}, and
@code{TERM=dumb}} are honored with the precedence already defined by the
@code{spacecraft-cli-standard} skill.
@end itemize

@subsection §18.2.2 — Rules that apply in accessible mode

@multitable {@strong{No decorative art}} {Spinners, marquees, blinking text, and progress animations are replaced by a single static line carrying monotonic progress}
@headitem
Requirement
 @tab Rule
@item
@strong{No animation}
 @tab Spinners, marquees, blinking text, and progress animations are
replaced by a single static line carrying monotonic progress
(@code{Working@dots{} 40%}), rewritten at most once per second
@item
@strong{No decorative art}
 @tab ASCII art, banners, box-drawing decoration, and figlet headers are
suppressed. Where the art is @emph{informational} (a diagram, a chart),
emit an equivalent text description instead --- do not simply drop it
@item
@strong{Linear output}
 @tab Output is append-only and reads correctly top-to-bottom. Blank lines
separate logical sections so a screen reader can navigate by paragraph
@item
@strong{Tabular fallback}
 @tab Any table offers a non-columnar rendering --- one
@code{field: value} pair per line --- since column alignment conveys
nothing through speech
@item
@strong{Prompt legibility}
 @tab Interactive prompts state the question, the available choices, and
the default in plain text before awaiting input. Prompts that rely on
cursor positioning or redraw to convey state are non-compliant
@end multitable

@subsection §18.2.3 — TUI linear mode

Any full-screen TUI MUST additionally provide a @strong{non-redraw,
append-only stream mode}, reachable through the same §18.1 toggle. In linear
mode the application writes new state as new lines rather than repainting
regions, and does not take over the alternate screen buffer.

Where a TUI would otherwise be the only way to perform an operation, an
equivalent @strong{non-interactive CLI path} must exist --- flags plus
@code{--json} output --- so the operation remains scriptable and reachable
without navigating a visual grid. Per §8, this path must be documented in the
project's Texinfo manual alongside the interactive one.

@node GUI Accessibility
@section §18.3 — GUI Requirements

Graphical applications expose an accessibility tree to the platform's
assistive-technology API. Which bridge to use depends on how the UI is drawn:

@multitable {@strong{Rust, custom-drawn UI}} {@strong{AccessKit} (Apache-2.0) --- one API over UI Automation (Windows), NSAccessibility (macOS), and AT-SPI (Linux)}
@headitem
UI stack
 @tab Required bridge
@item
@strong{Rust, custom-drawn UI}
 @tab @strong{AccessKit} (Apache-2.0) --- one API over UI Automation
(Windows), NSAccessibility (macOS), and AT-SPI (Linux). Already integrated
in egui, Slint, Bevy, Freya, Xilem, and winit
@item
@strong{GTK 4}
 @tab @code{GtkAccessible} --- WAI-ARIA roles and states surfaced over
AT-SPI
@item
@strong{Flutter}
 @tab @code{Semantics} widgets and @code{SemanticsRole}
@item
@strong{Qt}
 @tab @code{QAccessible}
@end multitable

Custom-drawn widgets are the failure case to watch: a canvas-rendered control
is invisible to assistive technology unless the application publishes its
role and state explicitly. This is precisely the gap AccessKit exists to
close, which is why it is required rather than merely suggested for Rust GUI
work (§3.1 already makes Rust the preferred language).

@strong{Requirements:}

@itemize
@item
Every interactive element carries an explicit accessible @strong{name} and
@strong{role}. Purely decorative elements are explicitly marked decorative
so they are skipped rather than read as noise.
@item
State changes that matter to the user are @strong{announced}, not merely
repainted.
@item
System preferences for @strong{reduced motion} and @strong{high contrast}
are honored --- these are read from the platform, independently of the §18.1
toggle, because the user has already expressed the preference system-wide.
@item
Keyboard reachability and focus visibility follow §10.
@end itemize

@node Accessibility Verification
@section §18.4 — Verification & Remediation

@strong{Verification.} An accessibility claim is not satisfied by inspection.
Before a release:

@itemize
@item
@strong{CLI/TUI:} pipe the accessible-mode output through a speech
synthesizer (e.g. @code{espeak-ng}) and confirm it is comprehensible when
heard rather than seen. Confirm the non-interactive path completes the same
operations as the interactive one.
@item
@strong{GUI:} exercise the application with a real screen reader --- Orca on
Linux, NVDA on Windows, VoiceOver on macOS --- and confirm every interactive
element announces a name and a role.
@item
@strong{Contrast:} measure the actual pairings used, not just
foreground-on-background, and record the ratios (§11).
@item
@strong{Keyboard:} complete every primary task without a pointing device.
@end itemize

@strong{Remediation for existing projects.} §18 applies to every project
immediately on adoption of v1.33, which means projects predating it are
non-compliant until retrofitted. This is stated plainly rather than softened
into a recommendation. Until a project conforms, it MUST carry a
@strong{dated remediation entry} in @code{PROJECTS.md} recording its current
accessibility state and the intended remediation. An absent entry is a
compliance failure in its own right --- a project may be unfinished, but it
may not be silently unfinished. @strong{Projects registered as games (§18.5)
are excluded} --- they owe no remediation entry, because they owe no
conformance.

@node Games Carve-Out
@section §18.5 — Games Carve-Out

@strong{Projects registered as games are exempt from §18 in full and from
§10 in full.} Accessibility features in a game are @strong{optional}: none
is required, nothing is enforced, and their absence is never a compliance
failure. A game may ship an elaborate accessibility suite, a single option,
or nothing at all --- entirely at the maintainer's discretion (§5.4).

@strong{Rationale:} §18 is built on CLI, TUI, and GUI assumptions --- a
character grid, or a widget tree with roles and names. Games satisfy
neither. They are real-time simulations rendering custom, non-widget
interfaces where play itself is the purpose, and the accessibility
techniques that suit them (remappable controls, colorblind-safe signalling,
subtitles, difficulty options) are a different discipline from the one §18
codifies. Mandating §18 on a game would enforce the wrong requirements at
disproportionate cost.

This is the @strong{only} carve-out in §18, and it is narrow: it applies to
projects registered below, not to any project that merely has a playful or
game-like interface.

@subsection §18.5.1 — Declaration & Registry

A project is a game for the purposes of this Standard when @strong{both}
hold --- the same declaration-plus-registry pattern as the §5.3 general-use
carve-out:

@itemize
@item
The declaration appears in the project's @code{README.md}, alongside the
§5.2 posture section.
@item
The project is listed in the registry below.
@end itemize

@strong{Games registry} (keep in sync with @code{PROJECTS.md} and the §2.1
registry):

@multitable {(all other projects)} {@strong{Game} --- exempt from §18 and §10}
@headitem
Project
 @tab Class
@item
Ironway
 @tab @strong{Game} --- exempt from §18 and §10
@item
(all other projects)
 @tab Standard --- §18 and §10 apply in full
@end multitable

@subsection §18.5.2 — Recommended for Games (never required)

The following are @strong{suggestions}, offered because they are
low-cost and widely expected in games. A game may adopt any, all, or none
of them; declining is not a compliance failure and needs no justification:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Remappable controls} --- already standard practice in games,
independent of accessibility.
@item
@strong{Leave screen-reader chords alone} --- @kbd{Insert},
@kbd{CapsLock}, @kbd{KP_Insert}, and @kbd{Ctrl}+@kbd{Option} are claimed by
NVDA, Orca, and VoiceOver. Capturing them collides with a screen reader the
player may be running.
@item
@strong{Colorblind-safe signalling} --- pair hue with shape, icon, or text
so status does not rest on color alone.
@item
@strong{Subtitles and captions} for spoken or plot-critical audio.
@item
@strong{Honor the system reduced-motion preference} where the engine
exposes it.
@end itemize

@subsection §18.5.3 — Shared Vocabulary

If a game @emph{chooses} to ship an accessibility toggle, it should use the
§18.1 names (@code{--accessible}, @code{SPACECRAFT_A11Y}) and the §11.1.1
theme-variant names rather than inventing its own. This constrains only the
@emph{naming} of features the game already decided to build --- it requires
no feature to exist, and adds nothing to the exemption above.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Compliance Checklist
@chapter §16 — Compliance Checklist (Audit Gate)
Before finalising @strong{any} Spacecraft Software artifact, mentally
verify:

@itemize
@item
☐ @strong{§2} Aerospace/Sci-Fi/AI naming convention applied to all
@strong{new} identifiers; legacy (pre-v1.2) names preserved unless
explicitly renamed
@item
☐ @strong{§3.1} Stability: memory safety (Rust, or ASLR+CFI documented);
robust error handling, fault tolerance, and test-verified
@item
☐ @strong{§3.2} Performance: concurrency considered throughout
architecture design; adopted where it advances performance, abandoned
where it degrades performance or compromises Stability; serial
trade-off documented; compiler optimization flags applied/disabled with
explicit notation; benchmarking before/after
@item
☐ @strong{§3.3} Hardened security; PQC readiness addressed
@item
☐ @strong{§4.1} License is @code{GPL-3.0-or-later} or
@code{AGPL-3.0-or-later} (AGPL for network-facing; per §4.1)
@item
☐ @strong{§4.2} Upstream copyright notices, license texts, and
@code{NOTICE}/@code{AUTHORS} preserved verbatim; upstream licenses
shipped in @code{LICENSES/}
@item
☐ @strong{§4.3} REUSE-compliant: two-tag SPDX header
(@code{SPDX-FileCopyrightText} + @code{SPDX-License-Identifier}) on
every file (or @code{.license} sidecar / @code{REUSE.toml} entry);
@code{LICENSES/} directory present; @code{reuse lint} passes
@item
☐ @strong{§5} Project Posture: README/NOTICE/CONTRIBUTING present;
default personal-hobby stance applied; general-use carve-outs declared
in project README
@item
☐ @strong{§5.5} Package distribution: @code{packaging/guix.scm},
@code{packaging/default.nix}, and @code{packaging/PKGBUILD} present,
buildable, and carrying correct version + SHA-256 checksum (in each
package manager's native format) before any release tag is pushed
@item
☐ @strong{§6.1} POSIX-compliant CLI/system tools
@item
☐ @strong{§7} Shell scripts are POSIX-compatible; Nushell/Ion native
variants provided where shell-native idioms are required; no Bashisms in
shared scripts
@item
☐ @strong{§8} Texinfo manual present for user-facing programs
(@code{doc/<project>.texi}); builds to @code{.info}, @code{.html}, and
@code{.pdf}; @code{install-info} hook present in all three package
manifests (§5.5) --- N/A for scripts and internal tooling
@item
☐ @strong{§9} PFA: no tracking, minimal permissions, local storage
default
@item
☐ @strong{§10} CUA + Vim-like key bindings planned/implemented; bindings
user-remappable; assistive-technology modifier chords (NVDA/Orca/VoiceOver)
not captured --- N/A for projects registered as games (§18.5)
@item
☐ @strong{§11} Spacecraft Software color palette used; Void Navy
background mandatory; new apps expose colors via a named
@code{Steelbore} theme (§11.1) --- no bare hex literals in UI logic
@item
☐ @strong{§12} FOSS-licensed fonts only (Share Tech Mono / Inconsolata)
@item
☐ @strong{§13} Material Design UI/UX; WCAG 2.2 AA verified, stating which
pairing was measured
@item
☐ @strong{§14} ISO 8601 dates; 24h time; UTC Z is the default primary
timestamp (companion local time with UTC offset permitted, never a
replacement) --- unless the project filed the §14.2.1 domain exception
for inherently local-time-bound data; ISO 8601 durations; metric units
@item
☐ @strong{§15} Attribution present: maintainer name
(@code{Mohamed Hammad}), contact
(@code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}), and project URL in
@code{--version} / README / About
@item
☐ @strong{§15.3} Third-party work credited in @code{CREDITS.md} at
project/skill root when triggers apply; deeper
@code{references/ATTRIBUTION.md} present where reference content is
adapted from external sources
@item
☐ @strong{§17} Development progress tracked and reported continuously
with milestone percentages, MVP, total PRD completion, and a Unicode
progress bar
@item
☐ @strong{§18} Accessible mode implemented and off by default; §18.1
toggle honored with correct precedence; status never color-only; no
animation or decorative art in accessible mode; TUI ships a linear mode and
a non-interactive CLI path; GUI publishes accessible names and roles
(AccessKit for Rust); verified with a real screen reader; existing projects
carry a dated remediation entry in @code{PROJECTS.md} until they conform ---
N/A for projects registered as games (§18.5), which are exempt in full
@item
☐ @strong{§6.3} All commits to Spacecraft Software Git remotes
cryptographically signed with the
@code{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org} key and showing "Verified"
on the hosting platform; rewrites preserve signatures; programmatic and
assistant-driven commits signed too
@end itemize

If any item is not applicable to the current artifact type (e.g., color
palette for a pure Rust library), note it as N/A rather than silently
skipping it.

@iftex
@bigskip@hrule@bigskip
@end iftex
@ifnottex
------------------------------------------------------------------------
@end ifnottex

@node Skill Cross-References
@unnumbered Skill Cross-References
@multitable {Implementing or auditing accessibility (§18)} {@code{spacecraft-cli-shell} + @code{spacecraft-cli-preference}}
@headitem
Task
 @tab Load this skill
@item
Writing any Rust code
 @tab @code{microsoft-rust-guidelines}
@item
Writing or reviewing shell scripts
 @tab @code{spacecraft-cli-shell} + @code{spacecraft-cli-preference}
@item
Generating DOCX / ODT / PDF on demand
 @tab @code{spacecraft-document-format}
@item
Authoring or building a Texinfo manual
 @tab @code{spacecraft-texinfo-document}
@item
Creating IDE / terminal themes
 @tab @code{spacecraft-theme-factory}
@item
Implementing or auditing accessibility (§18)
 @tab @code{spacecraft-accessibility}
@item
All other Spacecraft Software work
 @tab @code{spacecraft-standard-constitution}
@end multitable

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye
